---
layout: page
show_title: true
---

Singing the Nation Into Being curates and examines videos of James Weldon Johnson and J. Rosamond Johnson’s Lift Every Voice and Sing,” also known as the “Negro National Anthem,” “The Negro National Hymn,” and “The Black National Anthem.” This project features a collection of mashup videos and performances by a variety of singers in various milieu to consider the ways in which Black subjectivity, nation, and diaspora are constituted and contested vis-à-vis an engagement with a song now known popularly as “The Black National Anthem.” The site offers a range of videos for analysis—small groups, individuals, choirs, mashups, celebrities—and a variety of vocal and presentation stylings from a cappella to concert performances to instrumentals. “


Collectively, these videos comprise what I am calling an ephemeral archive. Websters dictionary defines ephemera as “something of no lasting significance”; something “meant to be discarded” but has now become a collectible. The central idea is that ephemeral objects are understood as serving a limited purpose, that they are temporally and spatially limited. Fragility and impermanence also lie at the core of how we typically conceive of such objects—that over time, they lose their materiality and meaning unless there is an active effort to preserve them (say, through digitization or memorialization). Yet the iterative and fleeting nature of such objects, I argue, can help us embark on an active project of reconstruction, what Toni Morrison calls rememory, as a means of reclaiming Black histories. In this sense, the project of active reconstruction considers data, information, memory as independent categories of knowledge—and as co-constitutive. Rememory— and the investment in the labor of recovery are central Morrison serves as foundation to thinking about how we do Black Digital Humanities and the ways that we understand these digital forms. Through this concept we might push back against the narrative of “lost” black histories—or tease out what me mean when we talk about “loss” in the context of Black cultural production. Singing the Nation Into Being” invites us to examine the ways in which each video highlights the strategies enacted through the textual, sonic, and digital performances of a “nation with a nation” (DuBois) as well as the limits of these enactments.