---
layout: page
title: About
permalink: /about/
---

> "You should write it down because if you don't write it down then they
will come along and tell the future that we did not exist."

<p style="text-align: right">Suzan-Lori Parks, <em>The Death of the Last Black Man in the Whole
Entire World</em></p>

<br>
<br>


Singing the Nation Into Being is an experimental digital humanities
project that aims to stir discussion about the meaning and resonance of
James Weldon Johnson and J. Rosamond Johnson's "Lift Every Voice and
Sing" (1900). Also known as the "The Negro
National Anthem" and "The Black National Anthem," "Lift Every Voice and
Sing" was initially conceived as a poem, meant to commemorate Abraham
Lincoln's birthday in 1900. Johnson and his brother J. Rosamond later
transformed the text to song to honor Booker T. Washington's visit to
The Stanton School in Jacksonville, Fla., where Johnson was the
principal. Since Johnson's initial conception, a performance by a chorus
of 500 schoolchildren, until the most recent iterations---such as
Beyoncé's performance at Coachella---the song has remained central, in
many ways, to Black American life.

Singing the Nation Into Being will develop in two phases using the
minimal computing model.[^1] The first phase features a collection of
video-recorded performances and mashups created by a wide range of
individuals and groups demonstrating a variety of vocal and presentation
stylings---from a cappella to choral performances to recitation and
more---in spaces both public and private. These videos form what I call
an "ephemeral archive," works created and uploaded often with a single
intention, such as observation of a holiday or a meaningful date (Martin
Luther King, Jr.'s birthday or Juneteenth), to mark a significant event
(Barack Obama's election), or to demonstrate shared cultural practices
(step shows and Black church services). Ephemera, generally understood
as having no lasting significance or purpose, would seem a limited site
for exploration both temporally and spatially, bound as they are to
notions of value and relevance and permanence. This might, in turn, set
limits on the kinds of discourses that surround such objects and the
ways we engage with them, particularly given their proliferation,
brought about in part through the process of "democratization" of the
Internet and the development of ease-of-use tools, such as YouTube. But
with this video collection, I argue for the salience of ephemera created
by Black people, and the work they do as potential sites of memory and
materiality. Engaging in a process of active reconstruction, what Toni
Morrison terms rememory, I return to the spaces in which artists,
groups, and everyday people locate their digital creations, in an
attempt to (re)construct routes to other sites of memory that might
allow us a different understanding of the resonance of "Lift Every Voice
and Sing" as well as its potentialities.

A second phase of this project will examine video metadata---comments,
likes, dislikes, up/down votes, number of visitors, uploader narratives,
and other data that get appended to each digital object.

### Navigating the Collection: Ephemera and Absence

I use YouTube as the primary source for this project because of the ease
of use and accessibility for both uploaders and myself (this "ease" will
be part of my later analysis on this site vis-à-vis a minimal computing
context). Yet, I remain keenly aware of the ways in which corporatized
spaces such as Google, are not "neutral" or benign sites but also serve
in the mediation and commodification of Black people and Black cultures
(Noble 37). So context matters: where the videos are located, who
accesses them, how that content is used (and by whom), who owns the
content, and the ethics of doing this work of "collecting"---are also
questions this project aims to address. The thinking and the working
through are ongoing.

This is by no means an exhaustive collection, but rather, a sampling.
The seventy-five videos in this collection are organized into categories:
Celebrity, Choir, Documentary, Group, Mashup, News, Solo, and Youth. Yet
these categories are not discrete. Some of the videos span two or more
categories (for example, Choir + Youth or Mashup + Solo + Celebrity).
These intersections highlight the ways in which the videos elude a
simple classification, troubling the notion of capture. This elusiveness
further demonstrates the ephemeral nature of these works as well as the
way that juxtaposition, vis-a-via a "collection," both reveals the
"hyper ephemerality" of the videos (Everett 11) and forces us to rethink
our ideas of (im)materiality and the (ir)relevance ascribed to these
kinds of digital objects. What might Aretha Franklin's call-and-response
in her performance juxtaposed with a mashup that features archival
footage from the Civil Rights Movement help us to better understand
about blackness---about identity, black creativity, community, and
belonging? Further, how do we place and understand videos of "Lift Every
Voice and Sing" that are not created by or feature Black people?

Moving through the collection, you will also notice that some videos are
missing. In the process of collecting these works over several years,
objects have moved or disappeared. Creators might have set their videos
to "Private," had content removed for violation of use terms, decided
that they no longer wanted presence in this space, or any number of
reasons. The choice to include such works is deliberate on my part. I
want to consider what these "lost" videos offer us in their absence.
These missing objects haunt the archive, help constitute it, and
complicate simple readings of digital ephemera created by Black people.

Singing the Nation Into Being thus invites us to think about how we
derive meaning from these performances and creative reworkings of "Lift
Every Voice and Sing." With this project, I also attempt to make a case
not only for the importance of ephemeral objects, but also for the
creators of such digital materials, many of whom take time and care to
construct and deploy compelling visual and sonic narratives about Black
life and Black creativity.


### Works Cited

Everett, Anna. *Digital Diaspora: A Race for Cyberspace*. State
University of New York Press, 2009.

Gil, Alex. "The User, the Learner and the Machines We Make." Minimal
Computing: A Working Group of GO ::DH, 2015.
http://go-dh.github.io/mincomp/thoughts/2015/05/21/user-vs-learner/

Morrison, Toni. "The Site of Memory" in *Inventing the Truth: The Art
and Craft of Memoir*, William Zinsser, Editor. Houghton Mifflin, 1995,
pp. 83-102.

*Beloved*, Alfred A. Knopf Inc., 1987.

Noble, Safiya Umoja. *Algorithms of Oppression: How Search Engines
Reinforce Racism*. New York University Press, 2018.

Parks, Suzan-Lori. *Death of the Last Black Man in the Whole Entire
World. The America Play and Other Works*. Theatre Communications Group,
1995.

### Works Consulted

Alexander, Elizabeth. "Memory, Community, Voice." *Callaloo* 17.2 (1994)
408-421.

Baraka, Imamu Amiri. *Black Music: Essays*. Akashic Books, 2010.

------*Tales of the Out and the Gone*. Akashic Books, 2007.

Campt, Tina. *Listening to Images*. Duke University Press, 2016.

Gordon, Avery. *Ghostly Matters: Haunting and the Sociological
Imagination*. University of Minnesota Press, 2011.

Johnson, James Weldon. *Along This Way: Autobiography*. Da Capo Press,
1973.

Morrissette, Noelle. *James Weldon Johnson's Modern Soundscapes*.
University of Iowa Press, 2013.

Parham, Marisa. *Haunting and Displacement in African American
Literature and Culture*. Routledge, 2011.

Perry, Imani. *May We Forever Stand: A History of the Black National
Anthem*. University of North Carolina Press, 2018.

Redmond, Shana L. *Anthem: Social Movements and the Sound of Solidarity
in the African Diaspora*. New York University Press, 2014.

Seniors, Paula Marie. *Beyond Lift Every Voice and Sing: The Culture of
Uplift, Identity, and Politics in Black Musical Theater*. Ohio State
University Press, 2017.

Sharpe, Christina. *In the Wake: On Blackness and Being*. Duke
University Press, 2016.

### About Sonya

Sonya Donaldson is Associate Professor of English at New Jersey City
University. In addition to her digital humanities project, Donaldson is
also completing a book manuscript, *Irreconcilable Differences?: Memory,
History, and the Echoes of Diaspora*, which examines autobiographical
narratives, music, and performances by Black writers and artists. A
Mellon-Mays Fellow, Donaldson is currently a Virginia Humanities Fellow
and a Visiting Scholar at the University of Virginia's Scholars' Lab.
Donaldson is also a former journalist who served as the Technology
Editor at *Black Enterprise* magazine, and completed stints at *Inc*.
magazine, Ziff-Davis publications, and the *L.A. Daily News*. Her
scholarly work has appeared in *Callaloo*, *The Feminist Wire*, *African
and Black Diaspora: An International Journal*, and *Women, Gender, and
Families of Color*.

---

[^1]: This site is designed using a minimal computing model. As Alex Gil
    notes, an approach to minimal computing centers around the question
    of need, what is necessary and enough to do the work: "If we do so,
    our orientations vis-a-vis ease of use, ease of creation, increased
    access and reductions in computing---and by extension,
    electricity---become clearer" ("The User, the Learner and the
    Machines We Make" 2015). I am indebted to Alex for helping me to see
    this project to fruition.
